Finite State Automata, explained in an earlier series,
describe exactly the same languages as Regular Expressions.
Every Regular Expression can be
converted to a Finite State Automaton,
and every Finite State Automaton can be
expressed as a Regular Expression.
For example, our Regular Expression for numbers: (\d)+,
can be converted to this automaton:
a non-accepting start state
and an accepting state, with two transitions.
You may notice that in this automaton,
there is no transition for anything other than a digit.
We could include these other transitions by
introducing a trap state,
as our Regular Expression
only allows digits in its language.
But usually this is left out for simplicity;
if a symbol has no transition out of a state,
we assume it goes to a trap state and hence
the associated string is not accepted as part of the language.
So what’s all this about languages?
Well, here we are not talking about the usual
human languages like the variations of English;
we’re talking about Formal Languages, each of which being
a set of strings that are accepted by some rule;
for example, (\d)+ produces a language that includes strings
like 203, 57, and even 000. But not b17, or -12.
Regular Expressions and Finite State Automata describe
a very particular type of Formal Language known as Regular Languages.
These may be one of the most basic Formal Languages,
so they can’t describe everything,
but they still have a huge number of uses;
variable names, numbers, URLs, email addresses and phone numbers
can all be described by Regular Languages.
Computer Scientists find it easier to read
Regular Expressions than Finite State Automata,
but computers are better at following automata,
so usually we design an expression,
then use a computer program to convert
it to an automaton, which is then used as required.